	Report on the ANSYS 'Research Associate Contract'

	Reporting period: 1st half of 1990
	Licensee: Hahn-Schickard-Institute for Micro- and Information Technology
				D-7730 VS-Villingen
	Program version: ANSYS 4.4
	Computer platform: DECstation 3100 / ULTRIX, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC)

				
General information:

The FEM program system ANSYS is used in addition to a university license on PC386 
computer basis as a workstation version for the calculation of complex 
FE models. The approximately 6-10-fold increase in speed and the increased 
wavefront range (currently 4000 with 130 MB ULTRIX swap space, 
16 MB RAM) allow the modeling of particularly large problems.

In the field of microtechnology, in particular sensor technology, FE models with 
the following properties need to be processed:

1) Anisotropic material behavior of the crystals (consideration of the elasticity coefficient 
   and piezoelectric matrix)

2) Non-linear model behavior that requires iterative calculation runs (temperature 
   influence, structural non-linearity, etc.)

3) Consideration of the three-dimensional structure due to the sensor geometry 
   generated by the anisotropic etching process

4) Consideration of the coupling of various fields, in particular piezoelectricity, 
   for the excitation of resonant structures as well as the 
	 the heat-induced stress resulting from microtechnical manufacturing processes


structure optimization:

The high performance of the workstation version allows the optimization of structures 
with regard to their static and dynamic behaviour within a reasonable time frame. 
behavior within a reasonable time frame. Due to geometry parameter changes, 
resonant force sensors based on tuning forks and double tuning forks were 
investigated during the reporting period. Depending on the structuring of the 
tuning fork attachment (vibration decoupling), an improvement in the vibration
properties (quality, unimodality, sensitivity) of the resonators was demonstrated
and thus contributed to dynamic structural optimization. The improvement of the
static properties, the minimization of stress peaks and shear forces, could 
also be demonstrated.


Analysis methods:

In addition to the static calculations (KAN=0), in which the micromechanical structures 
(membranes, reeds, tuning forks) are considered under pressure or force, the following 
dynamic analyses were carried out:
	- Modal analysis (Housholder, subspace iteration)
	- Modal analysis with change in stiffness due to prestressing
	- resonant mechanical excitation (KAN=6)

It has proven useful to carry out the above structural optimization with simplified 
FE models (isotropic 2D elements, small number of degrees of freedom) in order to 
roughly determine the operating point of the sensors, for example. The 'fine optimization'
of the structures derived in this way is then carried out using more complex models.


Piezoelectric investigations:

Initial piezoelectric calculations (KAN=2, KAN=6) were carried out using simple structure
geometries based on quartz. Familiarization took place on verifiable examples in which
the resonance (anti- and parallel resonance) and impedance curves were determined.

Th.Fabula
